Good day I'm Norman Woldberger we've been talking
about the relationship between Polly numbers and
vessels or vectors and now we want to incorporate
natural numbers or particularly the hindu-arabic
form of natural numbers into this story it turns
out that fits very nicely so we have a kind of
convergence of several seemingly different kinds
of objects all somehow captured by essentially
the same mathematical configuration so that
configuration is that of a vexille and the
vessel was a multi set consisting of Singleton's
and a singleton was a list of just one natural
number so usually we write a vexing like this
where we can see the singletons quite clearly
but in fact a singleton like this is actually if
you look at it strictly speaking something that
looks like this ok so here's the the bracket
outside their butt inside this too is actually
the M set of unit marks contained there there's
a mark and another mark that's actually what that
natural number two officially is so officially
this Maxwell actually looks more like this and
it's useful to remember that it fundamentally has
this almost very primitive aspect just built up
from our data structure point of view from these
essentially fundamental objects these something's
these units something's or marks on the page
now this notion above exle has an alternate
formulation or another way of representing
it is in terms of a vector like this where
we record the multiplicities we say that there's
two zeroes and 11 and 3 tues 0 fours and two fives
and then when we look at like this as a vector
well that's really almost the same as what we
formally called a Polly number and wrote like
this with a little bracket up on top and that
Polly number had another representation in terms
of powers of alpha as 2 alpha 0 plus alpha plus
3 alpha squared plus 2 alpha to the fifth so we
have these various things which are all pretty
well essentially the same thing but I want us
to think about the vessels as being primary and
it's really this thing here this object here
which is the fundamental container which is
then being interpreted in a number of different
ways and in today's video we want to extend that
interpretation in a different direction to give us
hindu-arabic numbers or numerals the big advantage
in regarding the vexos as primary is that then the
operations become particularly simple to state and
their properties become relatively obvious so
edition of vexos is really just emsett addition
because vexos are after all em sets that's what we
do when we add exles and multiplication is the M
set extension of this fundamental multiplication
at the level of Singleton's where the singleton
n times a singleton m is the singleton n plus M
we're here is the ordinary addition of these two
natural numbers so for example if we have this
vexille here and this special here then here is
the sum and here is the product I just remind you
the products is obtained by taking all possible
products between the elements of this one and
the elements of this one so this 0 times this 0
will be this 0 this 0 times this too is to this
one x is 0 is 1 this one times two is three and
similarly we get another 13 over there now at
the poly number level the same kind of thing
would be written this way this thing here would
be the poly number 1 plus 2 alpha or maybe alpha
0 plus 2 alpha to the one and this thing here
is just out for the zero plus alpha squared and
then the corresponding multiplication is just
the usual kind of polynomial multiplication
and it ends up being exactly the same thing as
this one here so this very simple multiplication
of Singleton's really generates the polynomial
arithmetic all right now we would like to add
hindu-arabic arithmetic to the situation and I
remind you that our hindu-arabic numerals are
thought of as independent of our natural numbers
logically there's a close connection but we don't
want to restrict our hindu-arabic numbers just
to be representations of our primitive natural
numbers if we did that then we would only have
numbers up to 10 to the 200 roughly and we want
to have a wider range of numbers so our aim is to
try to find a separate framework for hindu-arabic
numerals and have definitions and operations
and proofs of the operations which are largely
independent of the natural number system and we're
going to take our direction from the parallel
that exists between arithmetic with hindu-arabic
numbers and arithmetic both poly numbers are now
also back souls and that's illustrated with these
two examples here we have an addition of ordinary
numbers 302 plus 47 is 349 and correspondingly
over here we have the poly numbers 2 0 3 plus
7 4 equaling 943 multiplication if we have say
423 x 12 here's the familiar way of multiplying
these numbers two times three is six two times
two is four 2 times 4 is 8 1 times 3 is 3 1
times 2 is to 1 times 4 is 4 and then we have to
add them appropriately six seven ten with Carrie
and five and note the parallel between that and
multiplication of the corresponding poly numbers
down here if we take three to four that poly
number and 21 and we multiply them we also have
the similar kinds of operations occurring so three
times two is six and this seven occurs from adding
3 times 1 and 2 x to the tan occurs by adding
2 times 1 and 4 times 2 and the 4 is obtained
by this 4 times 1 so exactly the same products
that were happening over here they're actually
six products here and there are also six products
that we're figuring exactly the same six products
a slight difference is that over here we're not
compelled to carry right we don't mind having 10
in that spot we're not obliged to change that
10 into a zero and add one to this for to make
it five so in the vexille world we would not do
that but over here in the hindu-arabic world we
do do that so there is a parallel of course but
there's also a big difference having to do with
the the caring aspect which is related to the fact
that each one of these positions only supports the
digits from 0 to 9 and nothing bigger than that
while over here we're quite happy to have numbers
which are bigger than 10 in any spot all right so
there's a parallel but there's also differences
and we want to understand the relationship between
these two things and ultimately we're going to
define this world in terms of this world let's
remind ourselves about this subtle but important
aspect of carrying in our ordinary arithmetic of
course we know that it's based on having powers of
10 this too is 2 times 10 to the 0 here we have
0 times 10 to the 1 and here we have 3 times 10
squared and the crucial thing is that 10 ones
equals 1 10 they're exchangeable while 10 tens
is same as 110 hundreds equals 1000 and so on
that applies to each one of these positions and
is kind of obvious because we have just powers
of 10 all right so it's using this exchange
convention really this is underlying the fact that
in the hindu-arabic system we end up only having
at most 9 of any quantity in any position right
we can Jack that digit up to nine but no further
and so we can think about this if we like going
back to one of the earlier videos in the series
going back to primary school we can think about
having 17 one-dollar bills and 48 ten-dollar
bills and what we're really allowed to do is
to exchange to convert ten-dollar bills into a
hundred dollar bills or ten dollar bills into one
dollar bills and so on but as long as we obey the
right exchange rules which are given here so we
can rewrite this as seven times one dollar plus
9 times ten dollars so we have eight times ten
dollars over here and there's another one times
ten dollars because there's ten ones here that can
be converted to a single 10 all together nine tens
and hundreds well there's actually 40 10 so we
haven't taken care of over here and those 40 tens
can be converted to for hundreds this basic idea
of converting some sort of general combination
of ones and tens and so on into a particular
combination where all the coefficients happen
to be less than 10 if any one of them were bigger
than 10 it means that we can make some further
exchange and you know create more of a higher
a unit and lower the actual coefficient so it's
in the range from 0 at night all right so this is
basic exchange aspect that we want to get ahold of
so we're in the position now of having to define
or try to find what the hindu-arabic numerals
are in other words we need to give definitions
even though of course we all have an intuitive
understanding of what these things are of course
it comes down to the fact that we have 10 and
fingers on our hands that's the ultimate reason
why the powers of ten are important but from a
mathematical point of view we could readily ask
well why 10 we're going to create this system the
sort of official mathematical system doesn't make
sense to base it on 10 won't that make it rather
arbitrary how about 16 or 5 or 20 or 60 or two in
fact so what we are kind of obliged to do if we
are going to proceed formally in this direction
is to distance ourselves a little bit from that
tenfold aspect of our familiar system and think
a little bit more generally okay and we're going
to do that by actually having a look at this
simpler version first so the essential idea can be
captured already here in base 2 and it makes sense
to treat that sort of separately because it's an
important to kind of stepping stone so now let's
have a look at base two vexes we're going to take
our ordinary theory of exles and we're going to
adjust it in a small way we'd add some new rules
and then that will give us these somewhat new
kinds of objects bass tube exles and the new rules
that we're going to add can be described this
way that if we have a singleton 0 together with
a singleton 0 together they can be exchanged by a
singleton one it's the kind of base two equivalent
of ten one-dollar bills equals one ten-dollar
bill but it's at the level of Singleton's we're
just saying how we can replace one configuration
with another configuration typically in a multi
set and similarly if we have a singleton one
together with a singleton one we can trade
them in for a single singleton to and when you
trade to singleton tues in for a single signal
turn three and so on so this can be represented
more efficiently by the single rule this one here
that singleton n together the singleton n equals
a singleton n plus 1 now this is not meant to be
interpreted in terms of multiplication and we're
not defining a multiplication here we're rather
making a statement about in a multiset if we
have two of these things in a multiset we can
replace them with a single n plus 1 singleton so
let me illustrate this with an example so here
is a vexille it's a traditional ordinary vexille
but now we're subjecting it to these rules we're
essentially to this single rule if you like and
that means these two zeros here can be replaced
by the singleton of one and these tutus can be
replaced with the singleton 3 so we get a 3 get
a 1 a 1 from here a two and these two fives can
be replaced with a singleton 6 but then we can
do the same kind of thing because now we see we
have to singleton ones they can be exchanged for
a singleton 2 and then in the next step we see
we have these two singles in twos which can be
replaced with a singleton 3 and now we're still
able to do one more thing because the 2 singled
in 3 is can be replaced with a singleton for so
in this way we have transformed the original vexel
into another vexille and we regard all of these
vessels as being equal in this base 2 framework
so we're defining a new kind of equality
between vessels which rests on the exchange
encoded in this equation here so to summarize
two vessels are say base 2 equal precisely when
we can get from one to the other by repeated
application of this basic exchange condition
now we can write this kind of exchange story also
at the level of vectors or poly numbers let's
illustrate that so here is a vessel written as
a poly number novel to 1300 to all right so what
we're allowed to do is we can take these two these
are basically 20 Singleton's that are represented
here and replace them with a single one singleton
so they disappear but the number one Singleton's
now is has increased by 1 and similarly down here
we have two of these we could replace them with a
single one one further down okay now from here we
could replace these two at level one with another
one of level two so the now for at level two
and then at this next stage we take these four
and exchange them in for two of the higher ones
in other words to level three goals and then at
the last stage we interchange those two level
threes for a level four so it's the same kind
of story but it's just in the context of these
poly numbers and what we get at the end is alpha
to the fourth plus alpha to the six if we want to
represent it as a poly number and I think we can
see that repeated application will mean that all
coefficients are either 0 or 1 because whenever we
have a coefficient which is bigger than 1 that
means we can take two of them combine them and
replace them with something that's one higher
up and then the number of coefficients will
have dropped by to so if we keep doing that then
eventually all of the coefficients are either 0
or 1 just like in here so it makes sense now to
introduce a new type let's save x2 representing
a new type of object which consists of vessels
together with this base to equal d that we've
been talking about so for example 5 12 you can
check that's the same as 1 32 which is also the
same as 1 1 1 1 and this is now an equality in
vex too alright so now there's an interesting
exercise for you to think about we've defined
these new type of objects these bass tube axles
and we want to know appreciate that addition and
multiplication of vexos are actually well defined
in here okay that means that let's say we consider
a particular equation 5 12 plus 4 01 so if we do
addition that would be a 9 at one and three okay
we recognize this is something that's familiar
now over here we have different versions so 512 is
1111 I replace this one with another version which
is equal to it so this is another vexel but it's
actually the same vessel as that one in the VEX
too and we've replaced this one here with 0 0 0 1
that's 1 2 4 8 that's like eight this one is like
four plus four it's also ate these are really the
same and in other words we could go from here to
here by a number of exchanges we can place this
for with 0 2 and then we replace this to with
0-2 then we place this too with 01 now if we take
these things here and we add them using ordinary
vexel addition we get a 1 1 1 2 which converts
to 1 1 101 and the claim is that these two things
that we end up getting here are actually equal
equal under the exchange conditions so if the
ingredients are equal with respect to the exchange
conditions then the final results will also be
equal with respect to the exchange conditions
and that's true not just of addition but also so
please have a think about why that is and in our
next video we're going to talk a little bit more
about this base to arithmetic and why it works and
also give you maybe a geometrical appreciation for
what's going on here so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening